Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Developer Tools Kickoff.
As you all know,
our iOS and Mac platforms
are growing like crazy.
Apple has now sold hundreds
of millions of iPhones,
iPads, and Macs,
which all have access to the app stores.
There's a lot of users out
there ready to buy your apps.
And so our app stores continue to
grow beyond anybody's expectations.
As you heard this morning,
users around the world have
now downloaded more than
14 billion applications.
And all of them are built
with one set of tools,
and that's Xcode.
Just a few months ago,
we shipped our most ambitious
tools release to date,
Xcode 4.
Xcode 4 has a user interface that
was redesigned from the ground up.
Most of you are probably
familiar with it by now.
The new Xcode is built around
a single window workflow.
You can see several of its
highlights here on the screen.
The integrated interface
builder right into the IDE.
And our assistant editor split
the window to automatically
bring up relevant related content
next to the file you're editing,
so you can work on them side by side.
For example,
when you're drawing a connection right
from your GUI to your source code.
Similarly,
the version editor allows you to
browse the revision history of your
subversion and Git repositories,
and view the changes you made
in the side-by-side div view.
You can even use the timeline
in the middle to simply browse
back in time on your project.
The new user interface is the
most visible aspect of Xcode 4,
but we also delivered major new
versions of our low-level tool chain,
with the compiler, debugger,
and the performance tools.
Version 2 of our LLVM compiler
added full support for C++.
And in general, we integrated LLVM much
more tightly into the IDE,
so that LLVM technology is now
the basis for many features,
like automatically improved code
completion and syntax coloring.
Integrating LLVM into the
IDE also allowed us to
implement features like Fixit,
which uses LLVM to check for and
automatically correct coding errors right
while you type in the source editor.
And these are just eight of the
many features you find in Xcode 4.
It's a very big release,
and it's really taking our
tools to the next level.
In addition to making it available
to you for download on the web,
we are also offering Xcode
Now in the Mac App Store,
which is the easiest way to
install the tools and to stay
up to date on the latest SDKs.
And we want to make this
App Store experience even
better for you going forward.
We are working on a number of
mechanisms to reduce the download
size of the Xcode installer.
We hear you.
By breaking it up into multiple packages,
which you can download on demand
only if you actually need them.
And also, when Lion ships to end
users in just a few weeks,
Xcode is going to be free for all
Lion users right from the App Store.
Now in the near future,
we're going to ship two
new tools releases to you.
And we're going to time them with the
operating system launches Apple is
planning next few weeks and months.
Xcode 4.1 will coincide
with Mac OS X Lion,
and later this year,
Xcode 4.2 will add support for iOS 5.
Let's take a look at two of the
features of these new tools releases,
starting with Xcode 4.1 for Lion.
The first thing you will notice is that
we are making Xcode look great online.
And take advantage of the many
improvements in the new look and feel.
For example,
the new single window workflow in
Xcode works fantastic in full screen.
Another thing you will see us
doing more and more going forward
is focus on keeping our platforms
consistent and very integrated,
and avoiding any kind of
unnecessary fragmentation.
And so it's critical that you take
advantage of our latest technologies,
tools, and SDKs.
And to help you with that,
we're introducing a new
project modernization workflow,
which will offer to update your
projects to the latest settings
that we consider the best practices.
For the more performance-oriented
engineers among you,
we are adding the ability to
view the compiler assembly and
preprocessor output right in the IDE.
But the majority of new features in
Xcode 4.1 will focus on supporting
new line technologies and making the
Xcode UI even easier to navigate.
We're going to add support
for the new Cocoa controls,
like popovers and view-based table views,
an example of which you
see here on the screen.
We're going to allow configuring
Mac push notifications.
And Xcode is going to get an
editor to manage entitlements
for sandboxing your apps.
We're also adding new
customizable behaviors to Xcode.
But most importantly,
the integrated interface builder
is going to gain support for the
new Cocoa order layout mechanism,
which allows you to define the
resizing behavior of your windows
in a much better way than springs
and struts allowed you to so far.
To tell you more about that,
I'm going to head over to
Max Drukman for a few minutes.
Thank you, Andreas.
Good afternoon, WWDC.
So since Craig already gave my demo,
what do you want to talk about?
Now, ever wish you had one of these?
Yes, this is the mythical
"do what I mean" button.
Right, we've wanted one of these
for years and years.
Auto Layout is a little bit like
getting a "do what I mean" button
that comes already pressed.
Let me show you.
So here's an image editing
app I'm working on.
This is the intro screen where
my users can select folders
of images for processing.
I'm going to add one last button.
I'm going to call it
"Choose Another Folder."
and I'm going to place it right where the
handy Aqua guides tell me it should go.
Now, I'll wire that up later,
but for now,
I'm interested in seeing how my
interface responds to resizing.
So I'm going to run it.
Now, judging from the applause when
Craig mentioned this feature,
I'm guessing some of you
know what's going to happen
when I resize this window.
Let's have a look.
Yeah.
That doesn't look right, does it?
I have a couple problems here.
One is that my whole interface
is pretty much left in the
upper left corner of my window.
And I'm even getting strings
truncating because I didn't allot
for the number of digits I'm getting.
I wish I had a do what I mean button.
Let's see if Auto Layout can help.
I'm going to start by simply enabling it.
I'm going to go to the file inspector,
and click Use Auto Layout.
No other changes.
Let's run and see what happens.
All right, any guesses now?
Hey, how about that?
Now, how does Auto Layout do what I mean?
As Craig mentioned, thank you Craig,
what Auto Layout does is it
starts by taking the Aqua Layout
guides and it makes them stick.
So when I lay out a button in
the lower right-hand corner of
my window along the Aqua guides,
it stays there.
It also looks at the
contents of controls,
for instance, the text in my labels,
and makes the controls big enough
to accommodate the contents,
which is why I'm not
getting truncation anymore.
Now, there can be ambiguous cases,
and I think I've got one right here.
Yep, there's another classic case where
I have controls that are overlapping.
Now, for that,
I would need the Read My Mind button.
Unfortunately, I can't comment on future
product directions.
Auto Layout has me covered here too.
Let's have a look in Xcode.
Now when I select the cancel button,
you'll see that there are some
blue guides that draw persistently.
Those guides represent constraints.
Constraints are objects that
Auto Layout creates to keep
the components of my interface
aligned and sized properly.
Constraints are objects you can
work with just like any other
object in interface builder.
You can set outlets on them,
even animate them at runtime.
Now there are a couple of interesting
constraints going on here.
The cancel button has a constraint
that keeps it the default awkward
distance from the open button.
It will always be there because
that constraint is there.
It also has constraints keeping
the baseline of its text
aligned with the baseline of the
text of the adjacent buttons.
So those will always be
vertically aligned as well.
Now,
the problem I had was the cancel button
and the choose another folder button.
were overlapping when
my window got too small.
Now,
the old school way of fixing that would
be just bump up the width of my window,
right?
And I'm done.
But I want my interfaces to look
great full screen on a 27-inch iMac,
not taking up all of the pixels
on an 11-inch MacBook Air,
and everything in between.
So the right way to do this
is by adding a constraint.
I'll do that using the editor menu,
and I'm going to add a
horizontal spacing constraint.
Constraints can be inspected
in the attributes inspector,
and they can be set to be a
fixed value or to be flexible.
And that's what I'm going to do here.
So I'm going to set this constraint to
be greater than or equal to this value.
And what that means is that
when my window gets bigger,
the constraint will allow
the window to flex out.
But when it hits that value, it'll stop.
Let's see if I'm right.
So now, here's my window.
I set one constraint, and yep,
sure enough,
Pretty cool.
I now can't make this window small
enough to impact these controls.
That's because the constraints are
working from the inside out to tell
the window what size it needs to be.
Let's look at a more complex case.
Once my users have selected
an image to work on,
they can use this interface
to perform color filtering.
So above is a preview of my image,
and below are three boxes,
each of which has some
filter controls in it.
I've already set up some constraints.
Let me show them to you.
So when I select this label,
there's a horizontal-- sorry.
I knew I was going to get this wrong.
There is a horizontal
centering constraint.
And what that does is it keeps the
label always centered in the box.
There are also two constraints,
one on either side of the label,
that work just like in my previous
example as flexible space.
They allow the box to get bigger,
but only get small to a point.
so it doesn't affect the label.
Now, I also have,
all three of these boxes
are set up the same way,
by the way.
And I also have a constraint
between each of these boxes,
and that is an equal widths constraint.
What that does is it tells each
of these boxes that they always
have to be the same width,
so that when my window resizes,
all three of these boxes
will resize the same way.
This kind of multi-column
layout used to be pretty hard
to do and required custom code.
Now, with Auto Layout,
you can do it right in IB, zero code.
Now, why do it this way?
Why are constraints a
better way to do this?
Well,
If you think globally, right,
when my app gets localized into German,
it should still work.
When it gets localized into Georgian,
And keep working.
Because constraints are always keeping
my interface doing the right thing.
That's Auto Layout.
Let's look at some code.
Now, I don't know about you,
but I'm a little particular about how
I want things to be when I'm doing code.
So I'm going to do a
layout of a different kind.
I'm going to layout Xcode
using full-screen assistant.
Now, full-screen assistant isn't
a new feature in Xcode,
but it takes advantage of an
enhanced feature in Xcode 4.1.
We took the behaviors mechanism of Xcode,
and now we allow you to make your own.
Let's have a look.
Now, behaviors are a very powerful system
that Xcode uses to perform certain
actions based on certain triggers.
For instance, when my app builds,
I get a bezel alert that
tells me that it succeeded.
That's controlled by this behavior.
As I said, in Xcode 4.1,
I can now make my own.
I can even assign keyboard
shortcuts to them.
Now, the full slate of actions are
available for custom behaviors,
just as they are for the
behaviors that come with Xcode.
So, in this case,
what I did was I told Xcode that
I wanted to show a tab that I named.
I want to hide the debugger,
the utilities, the navigator,
if they were showing,
and enter full screen,
where Xcode's single window plus
tabs interface really shines.
Now I can even do things like
add custom scripts to do all
kinds of interesting things.
I could take over the world,
assuming I can write a
script that does that.
Now, there's one more kind of
layout I want to talk about,
and that is the layout of my code.
So now we're talking about the compiler.
So another advancement we put
into Xcode 4.1 is the generated
output category in the assistant.
So now I can look at assembly
side by side with my code.
It gets generated on the fly.
If I want to,
I can navigate through my project and
see the assembly of any file I land on.
I can even add another assistant.
And, heck,
look at the pre-processed output.
Why not, right?
So now, it's just my interface laid out,
Xcode laid out, my code laid out.
It's my moment of zen.
Back to you, Andreas.
Thank you, Max.
So that was an overview of the
Lion-focused features in Xcode 4.1.
Let's now take a look at what we have in
store for you with iOS 5 and Xcode 4.2.
First,
we're going to add a number of features
that will help you test and analyze
what's going on in your applications.
You can now sync data from your
applications back and forth between your
test devices and your development Mac.
And that behavior is even
integrated with unit tests,
so that you can now configure unit tests
to run the specific data sets uploaded
to your devices before your tests launch.
Instruments also adds
amazing new capabilities.
This includes system trace for iOS,
a very commonly requested feature.
Vastly improved multi-core analysis,
so you can take better advantage
of our dual-core processors.
And a new network activity
instrumentation that helps you identify
situations where you constantly
trigger data in and out of an app,
which can burn through
battery life rather quickly.
Next, you can now simulate locations.
You can even record
paths of locations and,
for example, simulate the user driving
around a specific street.
or you can visit other countries
and international locations.
And all of that, of course,
means that you can now make
sure that your applications even
work in places that you would
never want to visit in person.
The next is a feature that
will help you design your
applications in a whole new way.
How many of you have ever started
designing an app on a napkin or a
sketch pad like this shown here?
So this is actually a great way
to get your thoughts out on paper.
It's not always easy to
translate it to an app,
and you can't put napkins
under source control.
But this is really a great
way to-- this way of-- sorry.
This approach of designing application
with multiple screens and transitions
in between is actually very compelling.
And we're going to realize it with a
new feature that we call storyboarding.
Storyboards--
So storyboards give you a view
of your entire application.
They get you up and running very quickly.
To tell you more about this,
I'm going to ask
Jon Hess for a few minutes.
Thanks, Andreas.
Storyboards are all about letting
you build applications the way that
you think about your applications.
You get to see all of the screens that
make up your program in one place.
And more importantly,
you get to see all of the
paths that the user can take to
navigate between those screens,
all in Xcode.
We do this by introducing
two new simple concepts,
scenes and segues.
Scenes are the major visual
components of a storyboard.
Each one is defined by a view
controller and its associated view.
Now, everything you already know
about using Interface Builder,
like using the inspectors,
actions and outlets,
all of that applies to building
your scenes in your storyboard.
And no matter how many scenes you
put into one of your storyboards,
at build time,
we're going to process it and optimize
it into a form where it can be loaded
one piece at a time at runtime.
Now, this gives you great performance,
but it also means that you're
going to be able to build a
lot of things in one place.
And that means that each one of
the scenes in your storyboard is
actually more like a recipe or a
template and can be instantiated
independently multiple times.
This opens up some really powerful
workflows and sophisticated applications.
In addition to scenes,
we also have segues.
Segues are the glue that
binds a storyboard together.
Each segue defines how one
view controller instantiates
and presents another.
Creating a segue in
Interface Builder is easy.
You just control drag
from any event source,
like a button, table cell,
or even a gesture recognizer,
to some other scene.
And when you do this,
you get to define a transition
style that accompanies the scene.
We have support for all the
system transition styles built
right into Interface Builder,
including popovers.
You can even build
your own custom segues.
Storyboards apply to all
sorts of applications,
but today I'd like to demonstrate them
to you by building the introduction to
the OpenGL game you see behind me here,
Touch Fighter 2.
Let's go over to the demo machines.
We're going to get started with a new
instance of the OpenGL game template.
Our game will be Touch Fighter 2.
We're going to target the iPhone,
and we're going to use storyboards.
Storyboards are the default with all
of our project templates in Xcode 4.
Now, Touch Fighter is going to
be a landscape-based game,
so I'm going to opt out of portrait by
just toggling this portrait button here.
And I have a little bit of
prepared content in the doc
that we're going to use today.
Let me just drag that into my project.
So this is just a couple of
images that we're going to
use in the storyboard today,
and one view controller to
explicitly support landscape.
With that,
I'm ready to focus on my storyboard.
I've got a new behavior that I've
set up to jump straight into full
screen and hide my navigator and
show my utilities in my library.
Now, when I like to get
started with a storyboard,
I like to think about the
application from the outside in.
I like to think,
what are the major view controllers
or scenes that the developer or
the user is going to interact
with when they use my program?
I'd like to put them all in first,
and then build them
and link them together.
I can get an overview of my storyboard
by just double-clicking anywhere in
the background to get a zoomed-out,
high-level view.
And from the object library here,
I'm going to search
for "view controller."
and create two new scenes.
This will be our main intro screen.
The user will be able to choose a
multiplayer level in one direction,
or jump straight into the game for
either single player or multiplayer.
I can double click to zoom back in,
and I'm ready to start
building my scenes.
In the media library,
I've got a couple of resources that I'd
like to use with each one of my screens.
Here's a backdrop for our intro.
We've got a great star field for
the multiplayer level selection.
And as easy as storyboarding is,
making an OpenGL game is
still really rewarding.
So I'm just going to use a
screenshot here from my OpenGL game,
and we'll leave that to all of you later.
We have our three scenes
basically laid out,
and now we're ready to build
some segues here so the user
can navigate between them.
I need an event source.
I'm going to start with a button and
drag it over into our intro screen.
And this is going to be the single player
button to jump straight into the game.
And I'll duplicate it
once for multiplayer.
Now, I'd like to customize the
look of these buttons so they
look great on my backdrop.
I've got some custom images here.
And I'll set some titles.
So,
Now,
I'd like that text to have high contrast,
so over here in the inspector,
I'm going to choose a bright
orange and bump the font
way up so it's easy to read.
Okay,
creating our first segue is as easy as
control-dragging from the single player
button to the other scene and letting go.
So here's our segue.
This is a modal segue that's going
to do the default transition.
I'd actually like to be explicit
and choose cross dissolve.
I think cross dissolve is a quick,
tasteful way to get the
user quickly into the game.
Okay.
In our multiplayer screen,
we're going to have two buttons as well
to pick between two different levels.
I've also got some custom
resources here in the library to
make those buttons look great.
We have an Andromedan Assault
Level and Defend Earth.
I'm going to make some room
and create two more segues from
those buttons into the game.
Now we're ready for our final segue.
We'd like the user to be able to
click the multiplayer button here
and jump to the multiplayer screen.
But I'd like the user to be able
to back out of this transition.
Should they choose that they want to
go back and play a single player game.
And perhaps the most recognizable
way to do that in an iOS application
is with the navigation controller.
The navigation controller gives users the
ability to quickly move back and forward
on a list or a tree in an application.
I can create a navigation
controller in my storyboard by
just selecting one of my scenes,
going to the editor menu and choosing
embed in navigation controller.
And interface will slide everything
down to make room and create a
new navigation controller for me.
I'm going to select my navigation bar.
Change this tint color to this dark
brown that matches my screen better.
And move my background
picture to accommodate for it.
Now we're ready to
connect our last segue.
Okay,
something interesting happened here.
This brown navigation bar
propagated onto this new screen.
And if I look at the segue,
it has a different icon than the others.
This is a navigation push segue,
and it's going to do a transition
that slides in from right to left.
Interface Builder could tell from the
context of my storyboard with that
navigation controller back there,
that that was the best
transition to pick by default.
You'll see if we scroll over
to the Touch Fighter game,
it doesn't include the navigation bar.
That's because these are modal segues.
And the modal segues are
basically context-free,
and they're not going to bring
that navigation bar with them.
I'm going to adjust these
images to consider that bar,
and I can set a title here.
and I can zoom out to get an overview
and make sure that everything looks
just the way I intended it to.
I'm going to select all three
of these view controllers.
and opt them into that custom
class I mentioned earlier
that support landscape,
and we're ready to run
on the iPhone simulator.
Here's our Touch Fighter 2 game.
The user can click multiplayer,
see the multiplayer levels.
The navigation controllers
provided this helpful back button.
And I can jump straight into the game.
Thank you very much.
Back to you, Andreas.
Thank you, Jon.
So since Jon already started
building a game for us,
let's take a look at what we
can do to help you with the
actual OpenGL part of it.
There are more and more applications
that leverage the powerful GPUs in our
hardware through the use of OpenGL APIs.
One issue with running OpenGL code
is that it creates very different
debugging needs in comparison
to running code on the CPU.
Back in March with Xcode 4,
we started adding a number of
tools that help you understand
and diagnose OpenGL applications.
The first, very easy to use one,
is the OpenGL ES Performance Detective,
which is essentially an assistant
that performs a number of
experiments on your apps,
and then tells you which stages
of the OpenGL pipeline are the top
suspects for performance bottlenecks.
The Performance Detective can be
used as a standalone application,
but it's also integrated with
Xcode exactly like Instruments is.
So you can define profiling actions in
your project schemes that invoke the
Performance Detective right out of Xcode.
The other tool we added back in March is
the OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument,
which data mines the OpenGL command
stream to collect per frame statistics,
such as the number of
patterns and OpenGL commands.
And you can then easily view
which commands account for
the most processing time,
and get specific recommendations
for how to optimize your code.
Both the Performance Detective and
the Analyzer Instrument are invaluable
tools to better understanding
and optimizing our OpenGL apps.
With iOS 5, we're going to take it
a huge step further.
We're going to add a fully-featured
OpenGL frame debugger,
integrated into the IDE,
which allows you to visually debug your
applications and quickly zero in on
drawing issues and rendering artifacts.
To tell you more about this,
I'm going to hand over to Matt Firlik.
Thank you, Andreas.
When we first started designing
the OpenGL ES debugger for Xcode,
we had two main goals.
The first was to dramatically simplify
the debugging experience for OpenGL.
We want the IDE to manage the
complexity for you and make it
really easy for you to find and
fix issues in your OpenGL code.
Our second goal was to design
a user experience for the
debugger that was truly befitting
the underlying technology.
OpenGL being inherently visual,
we wanted a dynamic and
fluid workflow that was both
powerful and intuitive to use.
I'm proud to say that's
exactly what we accomplished,
because this is the new
OpenGL ES debugger in Xcode.
The OpenGL ES debugger in Xcode
starts from the foundation
of the performance detective,
the ability to capture a frame
of your running application.
We enhanced it with
information about your project,
your resources, and your source code,
and then integrated it seamlessly
into the Xcode debugging experience.
The OpenGL ES debugger gives
you access to a fully rendered
frame of your application.
As part of that,
you have access to all the draw and
state calls that make up your frame,
and all the resources
that contribute to it.
All the textures, the shaders,
and the programs.
And you also have full stack backtraces,
so you can seamlessly move from
the code you've written to what's
rendered on screen and back.
and David We've added two
OpenGL ES extensions to allow you to
take concepts from your application
and surface them directly
in the debugging experience.
The first is the ability to
label your OpenGL resources.
So in addition to referring
to them by index number,
you can also refer to them by a
meaningful name like moon surface.
The second is the ability to annotate
the OpenGLS stream with markers.
Now these markers give you the ability
to take a set of draw and state calls,
and service them in the debugger by the
concept that they impart to your frame.
So things like planet, enemy fighter,
explosion, or mother-in-law.
So I'd love to give you a demonstration
now of the OpenGL ES debugger in Xcode,
and show you how it can
maybe save the world.
So we're going to transition over
here to the Touch Fighter application.
What you'll be seeing on screen here is,
this is the Touch Fighter application
Jon started on with his storyboard.
I had the rewarding task of
implementing the OpenGL game.
So you'll see that when
I click single player,
we've now transitioned into our game.
And it's running here on our iPad.
I can fire some lasers here.
Now this is your kind of standard
space-faring application.
You are the last line of defense for
an unsuspecting planet kind of thing.
And you can see that as we
look at the different elements,
there's the planet in the foreground,
the mothership in the background,
and then some enemy fighters in my ship.
Now looking at the screen here,
we can actually see a problem
right out of the gate,
which is the upper two wings
for my ship are drawn in black.
I'm actually expecting those to have
the same texture as the lower wing.
So there's clearly a
problem for us to solve.
Let's see how we can use Xcode
to find and fix this issue.
So let's transition over to
looking at our Xcode project.
And here we see the Xcode project
for the Touch Fighter application.
I need to clarify that what
you're seeing here is a feature
of modern projector technology.
So this is the iPad projected
picture in picture on top of Xcode.
Come on, it's going to get better.
So here we are in our Xcode project.
Now if I were going to
debug this normally,
what I would probably do is seek
out the class for my spaceship,
which I have here,
and then find the method that starts
rendering it and just put a break point.
So we'll do that here.
And you'll see that Xcode seamlessly
transitions into the debugger.
And now I'm seeing the stackback trace,
and I can use the standard debugging
affordances to get information
about how my program is working.
But for something like OpenGL,
I really want more context.
I want the full view of what's going on.
And looking at it as a single moment
in time isn't really very helpful.
So let's transition into using
the full Xcode OpenGL ES debugger.
I'm going to remove my
breakpoint and continue.
And to start using the
OpenGL ES debugger,
we first need to capture a frame
of our running application.
To do that,
I'm going to use a new button that's down
here in the debug bar to capture a frame.
It's a little camera icon.
And you'll see that I'm going
to click this button here,
and Xcode's going to transition
into taking a capture,
and then bring that content
directly into the debugger.
So here we are.
This is our OpenGL frame
inside of the debugger.
Now, the debug navigator has switched to
showing us information about our frame.
All of the state, draw, and marker calls.
And the editor is now showing
us the rendered view of the
frame at a moment in time.
Now, it's showing me actually
the last view of my frame.
But I can select any earlier
point in the debug navigator,
like Skybox here,
and we'll transition to an earlier point.
Now, I selected on Skybox over here,
and it's one of these yellow folders.
That's one of the markers
I mentioned before.
I've gone through and annotated
the TouchFighter application
with markers to delineate all the
elements that contribute to my frame.
Now, in addition to making it really
easy for me to select one,
it actually shows me a high-level
overview of how my frame is constructed.
If I select the next element, stars,
you'll see that we actually transition
to showing the stars in the editor.
Now, the green wireframe here is actually
highlighting the elements that are
drawn just at this moment in time.
I can use the context menu and
hide the wireframe if we wanted
to see the direct details.
Moving along,
if I take the planet section here in
the debug navigator and expand it,
you'll see there are a number of elements
that contribute to drawing the planet.
The blue cubes are the state calls.
These are the things that set
up when I'm about to draw.
And the little spheres
are the actual draw calls,
the ones that take the images
and actually put them on screen.
If I select this first draw call here,
we'll see that the view
updates to show us the planet.
If I want to see more
information about the state,
about what's going on before I draw,
I can do so by revealing the familiar
affordance of the debug area.
So the debug area here at the
bottom has transitioned from showing
us information about variables
and registers to now showing us
information about our OpenGL state.
Both the global state of
the whole context and those
for just the bound objects.
Those are contributing just
to this moment in time.
We use the familiar affordance
of highlighting elements
in blue as they change.
So for those of you who
are sitting close enough,
you'll see as I start to move
through the debug navigator here,
those items will highlight.
Here we're turning off culling,
which we use to draw the planet.
I've bound up a new texture for the
planet glow that we're going to draw.
We're going to enable blending,
and we set up a particular
function to do that.
And then when I get all the
way down to the planet glow,
it's going to draw on screen.
So I can see exactly how that happened.
I can also show the wireframe
so you can see exactly how the
planet was drawn-- or the halo,
rather.
Or I can switch back to the planet,
and you can see how that was drawn, too.
If I want to go one
level of detail further,
I can also just disclose the
item here in the Navigator and
get the full stack backtrace.
So I can jump right to the source
code that put this item on screen.
So in one quick view that's very
familiar with the debugging experience,
I've accessed a lot of
information about my GL frame.
The flexibility of the Xcode workflow
allows me to change how I'm working
depending on what I want to focus on.
For example,
I can go up here in the toolbar and
collapse the navigator completely if
I want to focus on the main view up top.
Actually, the view up at the top is
showing me the buffer view.
In this case,
it's showing me the color buffer.
I can actually enable other buffers,
for example, seeing the depth view,
or actually the stencil view, too,
if I was using it.
Even in this layout,
I can use all the familiar Xcode
affordances to move about my frame.
For example, I'm going to grab up
here on the jump bar,
and you see that it lists all the
different elements in my frame.
And I could select, for example,
enemies and jump right to that section.
Again, this is a value of the markers,
allowing me to pick exactly
the thing I want to see.
You'll see that when I select it,
we jump right to where the
enemies are being drawn.
Now, when I think about my OpenGL frame,
it's kind of like video,
where you kind of want to
scrub through it to get to the
exact point you're looking for.
And we've included a
control exactly for that.
There's a scrubbing control down
here in the debug bar with the rest
of the controls that you'll see
as I grab it and move it about,
that the frame will actually update to
show me each point in time that I'm at.
And the green wireframe shows
me the highlight of what's being
drawn at that point in time,
making it really easy for me to
move all throughout my frame,
for example,
as my fighter is being drawn here,
all the way to the end.
So the scrubbing control makes it really
easy for me to move about my frame.
Now, let's get back to the
problem at hand here.
We see our spaceship here,
and the wings are still drawn black.
Now, the wings are actually being drawn,
so I know I've done some things right.
The first thing I'd want to
inspect is maybe I've not
set up my texture correctly.
I'm not using it to draw the upper wings.
Now, to do that, I want to see more
information about my frame,
and I'm going to leverage
the Xcode Assistant to do so.
I'm going to focus back on
just the color buffer here.
And you'll see as I enable the
Xcode Assistant in the toolbar,
the editor splits and now shows
me information about the current
frame and about the resources.
In this case, the Assistant is showing
me the bound resources.
Those are contributing
at this moment in time.
I could change the Assistant to
show other content by
selecting a different category.
For example,
here's the All Objects category.
So these are all the resources that
contribute anywhere throughout my frame,
making it really easy for me to get a
high-level overview of what I'm using.
I can double click on any
item to get more details.
For example,
here's the texture that's being
used to draw the space background.
Here's the texture that's being used
to draw the planet that we see below.
And I can even look at information
like shaders and programs to inspect
how they're affecting my frame.
If we go back here,
and we'll take a look at the texture
that's being used to draw my spaceship.
I've selected it here.
I can actually use the controls down
at the bottom of the editor here
to help me get a different view.
We'll rotate this around a
little bit to see better.
And if I had multiple
representations of this image,
a technique called mipmaps,
I could pick the different level here,
but I only have one.
Now, this item up here,
this dark gray wing,
is the one I expect to be drawn.
So I at least know from here that
I've got my texture set up correctly.
Maybe I've not bounded up correctly.
So let's go back to the bound
objects category in the Assistant and
see how this can help me.
Because the Assistant Editor shows you
content that's related to what you're
looking at in the primary editor,
and we know that this editor
shows us moments in time,
you'll see that as I use the
familiar controls to step backwards,
in this case, through my frame,
that the bound objects actually update
to show me what I'm using at this time.
Now you'll see the 60,
which is the frames per second.
As I step back,
we now have the texture that's
being used to draw the explosion,
the one that's being used
to draw the afterburner,
and now I'm into the
segment drawing the wing.
So just like this,
I can actually get a really
quick view of how my frame is
being set up and what I'm using.
Now, as you see here,
as I click back through the
parts that's drawing my wing,
we actually do see my texture
bound correctly up here.
So I have set it up correctly there,
but it's still not drawing.
Something else is not going right.
So I need to investigate further.
The next thing I would probably check is,
am I using my texture correctly?
So to look at that,
I'm going to expand the
state view down here,
and look at the details for my texture.
And I can actually see the problem.
As I'm looking at the
details for my texture,
I see that I've bound up a filter
that's expecting to use mipmaps,
those multiple representations
I mentioned before.
In this case, I know I'm not using those,
and my textures don't actually have them,
so that's why it's drawing in black.
So somewhere in source code,
I've not set this up correctly.
The OpenGL ES debugger can
actually show us the line of source
code that caused this problem.
And to do so,
I'm going to add another assistant
editor by clicking the check the
plus sign up here in the editor.
And I'll make myself some more room.
Now, in this case,
instead of looking at resources,
I'm going to change
the category to stack.
And now we see that right here,
this is the line of source code that
actually drew the element on the screen.
So in one full view,
we have what's on the screen,
the resources being used,
the state that it's in,
and the code that's causing it.
And of course,
like you'd expect from a debugger,
as I step through, it's showing me all of
these items in concert.
So we can see when we get
to this moment in time,
the filter is now blue,
which says that it's been changed.
And sure enough,
here's the line of source
code that caused the problem.
This really should be GL linear.
And once I save that,
that should fix my problem.
So very quickly with
the Open GLS debugger,
I was able to jump into my application,
find the spot I was looking for,
investigate resources, state,
and source code,
and find and fix my issue.
It's just that simple.
As an engineer,
it's really gratifying when you
can find the source of your issue.
As a manager,
you like to hold celebration
until you're sure it works.
So, what we're going to do here is
stop our running application,
and let's relaunch it to make sure
that we actually fix the problem.
Now, we worked really hard to make sure
that the OpenGL ES debugging experience
just felt like the regular debugger.
Like, there was no special magic.
The first time I did a capture,
I clicked the Manulate
button in the debug bar.
What I want to show you is another
trick to allow you to get this
capture a little bit easier.
To do that,
I'm going to add the breakpoint
back that I've created initially.
And in this case, I'm going to edit it.
I'll bring up the editor
with the context menu.
And now this is the breakpoint editor.
Now, this argument here,
time to this function,
is actually the overall
time elapsed in the game.
So I'm going to set a condition here
that says time is greater than four.
So after four seconds,
this breakpoint is going to get hit.
And when it does,
I want it to trigger an action.
And in this case,
I want it to capture an OpenGL frame.
So now you'll see that as I click the
single player button here on my iPad,
that the game is going to play.
And after four seconds,
I trust it enough to walk away,
you'll see that the
capture is going to start.
Xcode is going to capture a frame.
And sure enough, we fixed our problem.
So that's the
OpenGL ES Debugger in Xcode.
I hope you guys enjoy using it.
Back to you, Andreas.
Thank you, Matt,
for showing us the OpenGL debugger.
Let me now also give you an
overview of our CPU debuggers.
Last year here at the conference,
we announced our new low-level debugger,
LLDB.
This is a brand new debugging
infrastructure that,
just like our compiler, LLVM,
is designed with a strong focus
on performance and the ability to
integrate it well into the IDE.
In Xcode 4 in March,
we already made LLDB available as
a debugger for Mac applications.
In our next release of Xcode,
we're going to add
support for iOS as well.
So you can now debug
your iOS applications,
whether you're running natively
on the device or in the simulator.
LLDB is the future of
our debugging technology.
It's going to replace GDB in
the not-too-distant future.
And we'd actually love to hear
what your experience with it is.
Now, LLDB is also an open source project
that we publish under the LLDM umbrella.
And that finally brings
me to our compiler story.
Until several years ago,
we relied on GCC as our compiler for
both the Mac and the iOS platforms.
But today, our compiler of choice is,
of course, LLVM.
And with iOS 5, we're preparing the next
major release of it,
our LLVM compiler version 3.
LLVM is designed for speed, flexibility,
and modularity.
It compiles code about
twice as fast as GCC.
And at the same time,
it creates better and faster code.
LLVM is also the compiler
that's integrated into the
IDE for features like Fixit.
and LLVM is the only compiler in
which we implement support for new
language features we are developing,
like C++ or X.
So LLVM
and the rest of the team.
And now, let's talk about the next step.
LLVM is now a very mature
and proven compiler.
We've actually switched all our internal
products over to building with LLVM.
That includes the builds
of Mac OS X Lion and iOS 5.
And so with that,
the time for GCC is coming to an end.
Starting with Xcode 4.2,
we're not going to be including
a version of GCC anymore.
It's going to be entirely
replaced with LLVM,
and our compiler
transition is now complete.
When you switch compilers to LLVM,
you actually get the
choice of two compilers.
The recommended choice
is of course LLVM3.
It's our fastest and most
standards-compliant compiler.
But for compatibility reasons,
we are still including
a version of LLVM GCC,
which shares the front end,
so the parser of the compiler,
with the older GCC,
and so it's fully source compatible,
even if it doesn't implement the
latest language features anymore.
So we're obviously putting
a lot of energy behind LLVM.
And we've taken it from a research
project to a mature compiler
product in just a few years.
It has become the basis of many
fantastic features in our tools.
And now we're going to use
it for our next big thing.
So many of you have told us that
at the top of your wish list of
things we could do for you is bring
a garbage collection to the iOS.
And that's exactly what
we are not going to do.
So instead,
we're going to do something much better.
It's going to take a
few moments to explain.
Let me start by comparing the
advantages and disadvantages of
garbage collection to manual memory
management with retained release calls.
So garbage collection makes
it more straightforward and
easy to write your code.
And it also tends to reside
in more stable applications,
simply because you don't have
to deal with a whole category
of pointer problems anymore,
like over-releasing objects,
which can lead to crashes.
But unfortunately,
garbage collection has an
optimal impact on performance.
Garbage can build up in your
applications and increase the high
watermark of your memory usage.
And the collector tends to kick
in at undeterministic times,
which can lead to very high CPU usage
and stutters in the user experience.
And that's why garbage collection
has not been acceptable to
us on our mobile platforms.
In comparison,
manual memory management with
retainer release is harder to learn,
and quite frankly,
it's a bit of a pain in the ass.
But it produces better and
more predictable performance.
And that's why we have chosen it as the
basis for our memory management strategy.
Because out there in the real world,
high performance and
stutter-free user experiences
are what matters to our users.
But wouldn't it be nice if you
could somehow get the best of both
worlds and come up with a single
strategy that combines all the
advantages of these two approaches?
And that's exactly what
we are going to do.
With LVM3, we are going to introduce
automatic reference counting,
or in short form, ARC.
To tell you more about it,
I'm going to hand over to Chris Lattner.
Thank you, Andreas.
So Arc is based on a really simple idea.
Let's take all the advantages of
retain and release programming
without those little disadvantages,
like having to actually
call retain and release.
So to do this,
we're taking memory management
and pulling it into Objective-C,
the language.
Well, what does that mean?
Well, that means primarily that retain
and release are just going away.
You don't have to worry
about this anymore.
Now,
This means that the compiler is in
charge of the tedious and error-prone
work of manually managing your memory,
so you don't have to do that anymore.
The compiler is really
good at tedious things,
right?
But how does the compiler know where
your retains and releases need to go?
As Craig helpfully
pointed out earlier on,
for about two years now,
we have been developing this tool
called the Xcode Static Analyzer.
The analyzer is a fantastic tool
that uses deep compiler analysis
to walk through paths in your
program and try to find bugs.
It finds all kinds of bugs.
It finds all kinds of crashers.
You can dereference bad pointers.
One of the most common kinds of
problems that the static analyzer
finds is memory management bugs.
So with Arc,
we're taking one gigantic leap
beyond the static analyzer,
building this technology
directly into the compiler,
and having the compiler
automatically synthesize,
retain, and release for you.
It's that simple.
So let's talk about how the
analyzer looks at your example.
So here we have some code,
has no retain or release in it, right?
Well, it starts by saying, okay,
I see you're allocating a string,
and a string alloc returns
ownership of an object.
Well, then you pass it to init.
And it just returns the object.
You pass it down as log.
And this log doesn't
really do anything to it.
But wait,
you just return from your function,
and you haven't deallocated that object,
right?
There's nothing that points to it.
There's an object that's been lost.
And the analyzer says, hey, whoa,
you've got a bug.
Why don't you go fix this?
Well, now with Arc,
you just don't have to do that anymore.
So what does it mean to build
memory management into the language?
Well, retain, release, and auto-release,
those are going away.
Don't worry about those, right?
I hope you're not too sad.
I mean, maybe you're attached to them.
I can't really help you out with that.
I mean, you can choose not to
use Arc if you want to,
but you really should just use it.
But what does that mean for a
good friend NS Auto-Release Pool?
Well, I'm happy to say with Arc,
the number of times you have
to use explicit auto-release
pools has been greatly reduced.
Okay.
Arc generally doesn't require you
to deal with this unless you're
dealing with some frameworks that are
generating lots of auto-release garbage.
In the case that you do want to use one,
we're pulling it directly into
the language with a direct syntax
for defining a block statement
for an auto-release pool.
This is much easier, more natural,
and a lot faster than
NSObd release pool was.
Now, if you've gotten past the trouble of
actually calling retain and release,
there is still one more problem
which you may have run into,
and that's retain cycles.
So let's talk about those next.
And to explain what a retain cycle is,
let's just look at one really quickly.
So here we have three objects.
We have an application object,
we have a window object,
we have a view object,
and they're all connected
together with retain properties.
So our app points to our window,
our window points to our view, and oops,
our view is connected back to our window.
Maybe we added an outlet to our
nib and just connected it up
and didn't think about this.
Well, what's the problem?
Well,
each of these objects has a retain count,
right?
So that window has two
pointers pointing to it,
and its retain count's two.
Now, when I close the window
for my application,
the app drops its
reference to that window,
and its retain count drops to one.
Now, you'd expect that all those
objects would go away,
right?
Well, unfortunately,
there's still a retain
count on both of them,
so neither of them get deallocated,
so we have a memory leak.
Well, this is a pretty bad bug.
You know, you're leaking memory.
Oh, well, is it really that bad, though?
I mean, you're leaking two objects.
Is it that big of a deal?
The big problem with retain cycles is
not these two objects you just leaked,
but, you know,
these two objects may point
to megabytes of other objects.
It may point to your document,
and who knows what that points to, right?
And all of those objects
are transitively leaked.
Retain cycles can be one of the
nastiest causes and problems with
memory leaks that you can have,
right?
Well, I'm pleased to say that,
in addition to introducing Arc,
we're tackling this problem
head-on with the introduction
of zeroing weak references.
And let me tell you about that.
Zeroing weak references,
you can think of kind of
like a non-retained IVAR.
So they're very similar
to a non-retained IVAR,
but a heck of a lot safer.
And let me show you why.
So just like a non-retained IVAR,
you can see that the weak pointer
that I've replaced the back edge
of my graph with is not increasing
the retain count in my window.
And so when I close my window,
its retain count drops to zero.
Wait a second.
Automatically, transparently,
and completely safely,
that weak reference just dropped to nil.
I didn't have to do
anything with my code,
it just dropped to nil,
making it impossible for me to
dereference a dangling pointer.
This takes the second major
cause of crashes from your
applications and defines it away.
Now, of course,
that window has a retain count of zero,
so it gets deallocated.
Your view gets deallocated.
Your document and everything else that's
reachable from those things is now gone,
right?
And so we've solved our problem.
So we think that between
Arc and zeroing weak references,
we've taken some of the most
common classes of leaks and
crashes from your application and
have completely defined them away.
We think this is a fantastic result.
Now, we're so excited about this,
we've actually converted all
the new project templates in
Xcode 4.2 to default to Arc.
That means that if you create a new app,
you've already got Arc.
You don't have anything to do.
But wait,
how many of you already have apps?
Maybe one or two of you, right?
Well, so what do you do?
Well, I'm pleased to say you just start
over again and write a whole new app.
You can use the fancy new
Xcode Arc Migration Tool,
which is built right into Xcode 4.2.
The Xcode Arc Migration Tool works
automatically to move your application
to Arc through three steps.
The first step is to scan your issues.
Now, it's an automatic tool,
but it's not complete magic,
and so it can handle almost everything,
but there are some tricky
cases it can't handle.
If there's a tricky case it can't handle,
it tells you about it and
asks you to help it out.
Assuming that's not a problem, then,
it goes through and actually
rewrites all your code.
So all those retains and releases,
a whole bunch of other cruft in your
code that Arc doesn't need anymore,
gone.
Third step is it gives you a diff.
It says, hey, here's what I've done.
This is really great.
And when you hit Accept,
you now have a new shiny
Arc app of your own.
So instead of talking about
this and waving a slide,
how about we actually see it in action?
So here we have the code for
the Touch Fighter application,
which is an iPhone app.
Matthew has been working
on this for some time,
and he's done a great job.
He finally got his textures figured out.
But he's not really up with the times,
and so he built this as a
manually referenced kind of app.
Let's see if we can help him out.
To do this, we go to the Edit menu,
go to Refactor, and just down to Convert
to Objective-C Arc.
Now this is going to
scan through my code,
and it looks like it found a problem
that it can't automatically handle.
Let's see what it's talking about here.
If we jump here, we can say, oh, look,
I have an NS Auto Release Pool going on.
And it looks like this code is
doing something pretty crazy here.
It looks like somebody's been
really clever and optimized this.
So every fourth time through the loop,
it actually drains the pool
and then reallocates a new one.
Okay.
So the migrator can't handle
anything that's this complicated,
so we have to help it out.
Well, I'm just going to take
the body of the loop,
this is the actual meet, and cut it out.
And this I'm just going to delete,
because whoever did that was
being probably a little bit more
clever than they need to be.
And use our new add auto
release pool statement,
right?
I can put the body of
the loop right back in,
and now I don't need
this outer pool either.
Okay, with that, I've fixed the problem.
Let's try running the Migrator
again and see what happens.
And this time it finishes up
its incremental scan and says,
hey, well, everything looks good.
I'd like to move you now.
So we're going to hit Next.
It's going to go through our entire
application and convert away.
And here comes our diff.
Now, the first thing,
which is pretty obvious,
is that you can see that the
migrators touch just about
every file in our application.
Well, this isn't because a migrator
wants to touch all your code.
This is because memory
management logic gets scattered
throughout your application.
This is just the way it is.
This is why memory management in
a manual way can be so tricky,
because everything has to
be spread across your app,
and it all has to be perfect.
So if we look at some of the
changes the migrators made,
we'll start with explosions.
Those are the most
important part of any game.
You can see what you'd expect.
You'd see a lot of releases
that just disappear.
You look at this cube map, for example,
and again, there's a whole bunch of
routines that are just gone.
Well, here you see a very common pattern.
So let's say you've written a
dialog that just does a release.
Well, with Arc, the runtime and compiler
just do this for you,
so you don't have to think about it.
You don't have to worry about it.
And so here, Arc's just deleting the
entire dialog method,
because it's not needed.
Right?
As I said before,
the Migrator is actually pretty smart.
So here's a case where I was
using NSAutoReleasePool in main.
Maybe you have a main
that does one as well.
And it just automatically,
transparently migrated
to an atAutoReleasePool,
because it's well-structured.
Now,
the Migrator has a whole bunch of tricks,
and I'm not going to go through them all.
One last one I want to show you
is that the Migrator even knows
how to change assigned properties
and delegates and things like
that to weak pointers for you.
This means that the Migrator just
makes your application safer and
less crashy just by going through it,
as well as defining away
a lot of other problems.
So this all looks good to me.
I'm just going to accept the changes.
And let's see what happens
when I try to run this app.
So we're building it.
Up comes the simulator.
Go into single player here.
And I'm not going to
try to defend the world,
but you can see that here we're
running Touch Fighter with no
retains and releases whatsoever.
It's that simple.
Now I want to show you another
application I've been working
with and kind of playing with
and converting in my spare time.
This is an application called Dashcode.
Dashcode is a slightly
larger application.
It's actually our premier developer
tool for building web applications.
So I've converted dash code
in my spare time to Arc,
and I've been fiddling around
with the template chooser,
and I think I might have
introduced a problem.
So let's see what happens when
I profile it and run it under leaks.
Xcode is a big app, it has a little over
150,000 lines of code.
So this is a real world app.
Here comes Instruments in leaks mode.
Here comes my template chooser
I've been playing with.
And even just sitting here, I can see,
wait a second,
Instruments is already telling
me that I'm leaking memory.
This little red box is saying, hey,
there's something wrong.
And so I can look through this,
and it looks like I have a problem.
I am leaking NSCF strings,
I'm leaking mutable dictionaries,
I'm leaking some malloc memory,
I'm leaking URLs.
Clearly,
I'm not very good at this whole thing,
right?
I mean, what's going on here?
Well, one of the great new features of
instruments in Xcode 4.2 is actually
can search for retained cycles in the
heap and display them to you graphically
just by going to the cycles view.
So if I go here...
I instantly see the problem, right?
Clearly, I have several retain
cycles in my application,
and I can see graphically
what's going on.
I have a template library,
points to mutable dictionary,
points to template.
That all makes sense.
But the template is retaining
the template library.
That doesn't make sense.
So Instruments is super powerful,
and it can just display
this and find this for me.
It's fantastic.
So now that I know what
the problem here is,
okay, my template should not be
owning my template library,
what do I do?
Well, I have to go back and find this in
my code and do something about it.
One of the other great features
is because the compiler and
Instruments are working together,
is I can now just double-click
right on this edge.
It takes me right to
the IVAR in question.
Now, I could change this
to an unretained IVAR.
I can make it a signed property,
all that kind of stuff.
But that's not really
the right way to go.
The correct, safe,
nice way to go is to just
make this into a weak IVAR.
It's that simple.
Now let's run this again under
Instruments and see what happens.
So here we go.
And suddenly here comes Xcode
with my template browser.
And already we can see
that there's no more leak.
So all of those objects,
which was a substantial leak,
has been dramatically fixed just
by switching to a weak IVAR.
So that's Instruments.
So we're really excited about Arc.
We're really excited about
zeroing weak references.
But you may be wondering, well,
what's the cost?
What does it mean if I switch
my application to use this?
So let's talk about performance.
Now, in addition to implementing
Arc and zeroing weak references,
we've actually put a lot of effort into
tuning up the Objective-C runtime itself.
So what does that mean?
For example,
the retain and release implementation
on NSObject now takes as few as 40%
of the CPU cycles as it did before.
This is a major speed-up.
Also,
before I converted this NSA release pool,
this hand-tuned case to
at-order release pool,
is that going to cost me performance,
right?
I mean, clearly somebody thought
that it was important,
so they put a lot of
effort into doing this,
or maybe they're a little bit more
clever than they really deserve to be.
But in either case,
the new at-order release pool syntax
is much faster than NSA release pool.
It takes about 20% of the time,
20% of the CPU cycles,
because it's not actually
allocating an object,
right?
And it's just implemented
in a much more optimal way.
It's really great.
Third thing I want to talk
about is that the compiler and
runtime were co-designed for Arc.
They're working really well
and really tightly together,
which enables a number of really amazing
optimizations in the LLVM compiler.
So one of these optimizations is
to take a really common pattern,
auto-release getters.
The standard Cocoa practice is to
return an object auto-released.
But that means that it lives a long time,
and that means that it may not get
deallocated for longer than you want,
maybe at the top of your event loop.
Well, with Arc now,
we're doing two things.
The first is that the runtime
and the compiler know when
you're returning back to Arc.
Second is, in that case,
the runtime actually avoids putting that
object in an auto-release pool at all.
This is a huge performance win.
So the cost of doing these auto-release
getters when the optimization kicks in is
now 5% in CPU cycles than it used to be.
This is a major win.
The second big win of this, of course,
is not a CPU performance optimization.
It's the huge memory optimization,
because now these things aren't
going into an auto-release pool,
and so that means they get
deallocated as soon as the
last pointer of them goes away.
And that's really the huge advantage
of Arc versus a garbage collector,
is that your objects go away
right away when they're dead.
and So this is pretty great.
We're really excited about this.
Where do you think that you can use Arc?
Well, I'm pleased to say that Arc is
available on both of the premier
platforms we announced earlier today,
iOS 5 and Mac OS Online.
and going a little bit farther,
Arc is so great that the first
application is already in the store.
Maybe you've seen it.
This is the WWDC attendee app.
Now, switching to Arc actually saved this
app a substantial amount of memory.
It also shrunk the code by about
5%, which is a huge maintenance win
and has many other benefits as well.
But you may be wondering,
how many of you all are
running this on iOS 5 or Lion?
I don't know.
Well, that's-- you're not,
and that's because Arc also works all
the way back to iOS 4 and Snowletter.
So we're obviously
really excited about Arc.
We think that this is a great
answer to many of the problems
you've had with your applications'
memory use and memory management.
And so we can't wait to see what
you do within your own applications.
Back to you, Andreas.
Thank you, Chris.
So many of you have told us
that memory management is one of
the biggest hurdles for quickly
developing apps on our platforms.
And with Arc, we think we have the
right answer for you.
It gives us the right
stutter-free performance.
It makes your applications more robust.
And it makes your code easier to write.
So we think Arc is
going to be a big deal,
and we think you're going
to be very happy with it.
So for the last hour,
we've shown you a preview
of several features that are
coming your way in the tools.
And today,
we're going to make them available
to you as several developer previews.
If you want to get your applications
ready for Mac OS X Lion,
go and download the Xcode 4.1 developer
preview from the WWDC attendee website.
It contains everything you need
for Lion to get your applications
ready for the Mac App Store.
If you want to get your applications
ready for iOS 5 later this year,
go and download the Xcode
4.2 developer preview today,
which is available as a preview running
both on Snow Leopard and on Lion.
So with that,
we come to an end of the session.
Hope you enjoyed it,
and have a wonderful conference.